

Boston Globe


 Maddening deeds at US universities


 By William J. Bennett, 11/4/2001


 THESE ARE NOT times that should try our minds. But, sadly, in some of our nation's most
 esteemed redoubts, they are. Once upon a time, our college campuses and universities were
 serious places, founded to inform the intellect and nurture the soul. In the wake of the mass
 slaughter America suffered on Sept. 11, most Americans understood the enormity of the attack
 and supported a strong national response. But in our colleges and universities, our national
 convictions are less clear.


 As deconstruction and political correctness were taking root in the academy throughout the
 1970s and 1980s, Americans took little note. Humanities and political science departments were
 swinging dramatically leftward, imprecating American history and our founding. To speak of
 self-evident truths as anything but a cultural construct was a practical guarantee that one
 would not be hired to teach at a college or university. Were a doctoral candidate to write his
 dissertation on the seriousness of some aspect of our nation's founding, assuming he could
 assemble a dissertation committee that would accept the topic, he would find it close to
 impossible to find a starting job in academia. Many blithely dismissed this situation. Now we
 are reaping the effects of this foolishness.


 Eric Foner of Columbia University recently wrote, ''I'm not sure which is more frightening: the
 horror that engulfed New York City or the apocalyptic rhetoric emanating daily from the White
 House.''


 I haven't heard any apocalyptic rhetoric, but if Foner is unsure of which is worse, I suggest he
 leave his Ivory Tower for a moment and take a walk to where the Twin Towers used to stand.
 Or ask the widow or orphan of a firefighter.


 According to the current issue of Commentary, a young woman who graduated from Williams
 College last year died in the attack of Sept. 11. A sophomore organized a public recitation of the
 Pledge of Allegiance in her honor. President Morton Schapiro urged the entire campus to
 attend.


 Two hundred students did. Numerous members of the maintenance crew and several cafeteria
 workers attended. The only faculty members in attendance were the chairman of the art
 department and the college president.


 Meanwhile, a student participating in a war protest wanted ribbons for their vigil. When it was
 suggested that the protesters get red, white, and blue ribbons, the student stated that would be
 too nationalistic. There is something terribly wrong in our country when a student at one of the
 most elite colleges is offended and can speak on behalf of others who are offended by the flag of
 the United States in the wake of the slaughter of 5,000 innocents. Students are not immune to
 their professors' teachings and actions.


 The bin Laden family has endowed fellowships at Harvard valued at several million dollars.
 And yet ROTC is not welcome at Harvard. Harvard has been willing to make distinctions and
 defend the bin Laden family's money, citing their disowning of the terrorist mastermind.
 Harvard has not, however, seen fit to make any distinctions to defend ROTC.


 When ROTC is not welcome at Harvard, but Binladin family money is, we are witnessing
 moral confusion. When the country is at war, it should not be too much to ask Harvard to do its
 small part and welcome ROTC back to its campus. In federal law, a provision known as the
 Solomon Amendment allows the Department of Defense to withdraw funds from universities
 that prevent ROTC access or military recruiting on campus. The Department of Defense may
 wish to look into this in the case of Harvard. The US military should not be an anathema to
 Harvard, especially when the Binladins are not.


 These situations force us to reconsider Thomas Jefferson's point that every difference of
 opinion is not a difference of principle. Just whose principles are the Columbia, Williams
 College, and Harvard faculties promoting? Have they criticized Osama bin Laden as much as
 they have President George W. Bush? Do they understand the difference between the two men?
 Nevermind the difference between words and actions, the principles behind the two sides do
 not even belong in the same moral encyclopedia.


 There is a lot that is healthy in our country right now and some things that are not. Our First
 Amendment is in healthy, robust shape, but the condition of moral clarity at our universities is
 murky, at best. We should not be neutral about our country, about the difference between
 civilization and terrorism. And we should no longer expect so little from our colleges and
 universities.


 William J. Bennett, a former US secretary of education, is a codirector at Empower America.


 This story ran on page C7 of the Boston Globe on 11/4/2001.
 © Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company.