ALLAH MUST BE PROUD... A ONE-WAY RIDE TO OBLIVION


ALLAH MUST BE PROUD
A ONE-WAY RIDE TO OBLIVION

By: John Guthmiller
            The most absurd aspect of the Trade Center bombings is that the 
            butchery was committed in the name of religion, as if there's a god 
            somewhere who delights in wholesale murder carried out in his name. 
            Of course, the murderers no longer know or care what or whom they're 
            killing, but as always in a case of indulgent criminality, some 
            veneer of respectability must accompany it or it becomes just 
            another act of genocide.
            The terrorists think that couching their savagery in quasi-religious 
            or nationalistic terms elevates it above mere murder and grants it 
            the dispensation of noble intent. But Islamic scholars confirm that 
            nothing in the Koran gives license to wholesale slaughter of 
            innocents, and agree that the jihad against America has its roots in 
            soil far more secular than celestial. In rare interviews, Bin Laden 
            has admitted that his goal is the extermination of the United 
            States, and relishes the day when his holy warriors can hide behind 
            trees and shoot down infidels.
            Apparently we have regressed to an age when religious war once again 
            threatens civilization, as it has for centuries in the Middle East. 
            Cultures as old as those in the cradle of mankind should have 
            developed economically and technologically beyond the primitive 
            second-world stage that characterizes most of the eastern 
            Mediterranean. Only unceasing war has prevented those peoples from 
            advancing into a thoroughly modern world, whose agricultural 
            practices feed their people, whose factories produce goods that ease 
            their citizens' daily burdens, and whose security transports life 
            from mere survival to a waking ration of joy.
            In those precincts, any sign of progress is regarded as evidence 
            that the enemy has virtues your side lacks. Rather than working to 
            develop those assets of your own, the solution has traditionally 
            been to destroy the assets of the enemy. It's the ultimate technique 
            for social leveling: keep everyone living in stone huts and eating 
            gruel and nobody can claim any moral superiority over anyone else. 
            It's life resigned to the lowest common denominator.
            Now, those brutes seek to export their own brand of cultural 
            devolution to the rest of the world. It is no coincidence that they 
            struck at the World Trade Center, a marvel of engineering and a 
            fitting tribute to the advanced culture that produced it. In regions 
            where centuries of brutality and privation have reduced even the 
            mountains to rubble, a gleaming symbol of western success must have 
            stood as a constant reminder of their own cultural inadequacy. Call 
            it penis envy on a socio-cultural scale.
            Or call it class envy. The United States has not achieved all its 
            successes without some measure of shadowy behavior; we are not above 
            reproach in our dealings with the Indians and with many of the 
            immigrant classes over the years. The pursuit of power can distort 
            the noble leanings of otherwise good men and women. Maybe America is 
            too material, too loutish, too overbearing in its paper chase. But, 
            inflamed rhetoric notwithstanding, we are not hegemonic, we are not 
            imperialistic, we are not Gucci-shod exploiters of the downtrodden. 
            Nor are we warmongers who use our military as economic porters to 
            plunder conquered nations. Far from rapine, our contribution to 
            post-war Europe was the Marshall Plan. And Japan was effectively 
            rebuilt from smoking ruin into a first-class world player using 
            American know-how. Any number of third-world flytraps owe their very 
            existence to us, since we've underwritten loans to them for decades, 
            and have seen only a pittance ever repaid.
            Even in the battered ruins of the Middle East, the United States has 
            tried to negotiate a peace accord for the past 50 years. Every hope 
            has vanished in the corrosive fog of bigotry, irrational hatred, and 
            what appear to be irreconcilable cultural differences. For siding 
            with Israel, for asserting that nation's right to exist, our 
            citizens are now to be targets of skulking assassins and 
            knife-wielding kamikazes. For professing a belief in God instead of 
            Allah, we have been branded as a Great Satan, singled out for 
            destruction as the head of an anti-Islamic snake whose demise 
            guarantees its killer a fast track to Heaven. 
            But this isn't about religion anyway. It would be nice to grant 
            Osama his dispensation, for following his tortured conscience and 
            simply obeying the will of Allah. But that's just grist for the PR 
            mills. The fact is, this strike - and all the others against Western 
            targets - is the result of simple jealousy. The Islam-dominated 
            cultures of the Middle East, left to their own devices, have not 
            progressed in 3,000 years to the degree Western civilization has in 
            a tenth that time. Culturally, Islam is losing the war. Its 
            adherents must see that economic development favors non-Islamic 
            countries, while repression, brutality, and misery are the constant 
            shadows cast by the crescent moon. Fundamentalist leaders know that 
            the appeal of materialism is strong, and that they cannot combat 
            that lure through morality alone. Sometimes goodness needs to be 
            coaxed from people at the point of the sword. 
            So, as power slips from their grasp, they desperately seek a focus 
            for their failures, a "Great Satan" on whom they can blame all their 
            own shortcomings. What better target for that hatred than the Jews 
            and their lucrative allies, the United States? Now, religious 
            differences take on economic overtones, and since there is no 
            separation of mosque and state, political implications as well. It 
            has been stated repeatedly over the last week that the Afghan people 
            despise the Taliban. Yet that oppressive faction rules the country 
            with brutal abandon. At least the Ayatollah had the support of the 
            people. Not for long, mind you, when his extremism became an 
            embarrassment. But in the beginning, anything was better than the 
            Shah. 
            Not so in Afghanistan. The mujahedeen who were supposed to deliver 
            the country from war have carried the war into the countryside, and 
            into the minds of the exhausted citizenry. The patina of 
            "deliverance' and moral rectitude is wearing thin. Even the Taliban 
            as much as admits that they don't rule Bin Laden; he rules them. So 
            Afghanistan has become a slave state to the whim of a spoiled rich 
            kid from Saudi Arabia, and his personal prejudices are about to earn 
            that unfortunate nation a one-way ride to oblivion. All the lofty 
            rhetoric of the Islamic fanatics hasn't fed the people, taught them 
            to read, or put shoes on their feet. Yet American money made Osama 
            Bin Laden a rich man. The hollow drumbeat of "jihad" is just an 
            annoying undertone to a petty chorus of hypocrisy. 
            Allah must be very proud. 

                  Mail this article to a friend(s) in two clicks!





      John Guthmiller is a freelance political writer and a staff columnist for 
      Ether Zone.

      John can be reached at sfs01@home.com
      John's articles are also published on the Free Republic Website.

      Published in the September 25, 2001 issue of Ether Zone. 
      Copyright © 2001 Ether Zone   (http://etherzone.com). 
      Reposting permitted with this message intact.
            We invite your comments on this article in our forum!



