     

      The Roots of Muslim Rage - 90.09



      S E P T E M B E R   1 9 9 0


      Why so many Muslims deeply resent the West, and why their bitterness will 
      not easily be mollified

      by Bernard Lewis


Copyright © 1990 by Bernard Lewis. All rights reserved. 
The Atlantic Monthly; September 1990; The Roots of Muslim Rage; Volume 
266, No. 3



      IN one of his letters Thomas Jefferson remarked that in matters of 
      religion "the maxim of civil government" should be reversed and we should 
      rather say, "Divided we stand, united, we fall." In this remark Jefferson 
      was setting forth with classic terseness an idea that has come to be 
      regarded as essentially American: the separation of Church and State. This 
      idea was not entirely new; it had some precedents in the writings of 
      Spinoza, Locke, and the philosophers of the European Enlightenment. It was 
      in the United States, however, that the principle was first given the 
      force of law and gradually, in the course of two centuries, became a 
      reality.

      If the idea that religion and politics should be separated is relatively 
      new, dating back a mere three hundred years, the idea that they are 
      distinct dates back almost to the beginnings of Christianity. Christians 
      are enjoined in their Scriptures to "render ... unto Caesar the things 
      which are Caesar's and unto God the things which are God's." While 
      opinions have differed as to the real meaning of this phrase, it has 
      generally been interpreted as legitimizing a situation in which two 
      institutions exist side by side, each with its own laws and chain of 
      authority -- one concerned with religion, called the Church, the other 
      concerned with politics, called the State. And since they are two, they 
      may be joined or separated, subordinate or independent, and conflicts may 
      arise between them over questions of demarcation and jurisdiction. 
      Discuss this article in the Global Views forum of Post & Riposte. 

      Return to Flashback: "Coming to Grips with Jihad." 
      This formulation of the problems posed by the relations between religion 
      and politics, and the possible solutions to those problems, arise from 
      Christian, not universal, principles and experience. There are other 
      religious traditions in which religion and politics are differently 
      perceived, and in which, therefore, the problems and the possible 
      solutions are radically different from those we know in the West. Most of 
      these traditions, despite their often very high level of sophistication 
      and achievement, remained or became local -- limited to one region or one 
      culture or one people. There is one, however, that in its worldwide 
      distribution, its continuing vitality, its universalist aspirations, can 
      be compared to Christianity, and that is Islam.

      Islam is one of the world's great religions. Let me be explicit about what 
      I, as a historian of Islam who is not a Muslim, mean by that. Islam has 
      brought comfort and peace of mind to countless millions of men and women. 
      It has given dignity and meaning to drab and impoverished lives. It has 
      taught people of different races to live in brotherhood and people of 
      different creeds to live side by side in reasonable tolerance. It inspired 
      a great civilization in which others besides Muslims lived creative and 
      useful lives and which, by its achievement, enriched the whole world. But 
      Islam, like other religions, has also known periods when it inspired in 
      some of its followers a mood of hatred and violence. It is our misfortune 
      that part, though by no means all or even most, of the Muslim world is now 
      going through such a period, and that much, though again not all, of that 
      hatred is directed against us.

      We should not exaggerate the dimensions of the problem. The Muslim world 
      is far from unanimous in its rejection of the West, nor have the Muslim 
      regions of the Third World been the most passionate and the most extreme 
      in their hostility. There are still significant numbers, in some quarters 
      perhaps a majority, of Muslims with whom we share certain basic cultural 
      and moral, social and political, beliefs and aspirations; there is still 
      an imposing Western presence -- cultural, economic, diplomatic -- in 
      Muslim lands, some of which are Western allies. Certainly nowhere in the 
      Muslim world, in the Middle East or elsewhere, has American policy 
      suffered disasters or encountered problems comparable to those in 
      Southeast Asia or Central America. There is no Cuba, no Vietnam, in the 
      Muslim world, and no place where American forces are involved as 
      combatants or even as "advisers." But there is a Libya, an Iran, and a 
      Lebanon, and a surge of hatred that distresses, alarms, and above all 
      baffles Americans.

      At times this hatred goes beyond hostility to specific interests or 
      actions or policies or even countries and becomes a rejection of Western 
      civilization as such, not only what it does but what it is, and the 
      principles and values that it practices and professes. These are indeed 
      seen as innately evil, and those who promote or accept them as the 
      "enemies of God."

      This phrase, which recurs so frequently in the language of the Iranian 
      leadership, in both their judicial proceedings and their political 
      pronouncements, must seem very strange to the modern outsider, whether 
      religious or secular. The idea that God has enemies, and needs human help 
      in order to identify and dispose of them, is a little difficult to 
      assimilate. It is not, however, all that alien. The concept of the enemies 
      of God is familiar in preclassical and classical antiquity, and in both 
      the Old and New Testaments, as well as in the Koran. A particularly 
      relevant version of the idea occurs in the dualist religions of ancient 
      Iran, whose cosmogony assumed not one but two supreme powers. The 
      Zoroastrian devil, unlike the Christian or Muslim or Jewish devil, is not 
      one of God's creatures performing some of God's more mysterious tasks but 
      an independent power, a supreme force of evil engaged in a cosmic struggle 
      against God. This belief influenced a number of Christian, Muslim, and 
      Jewish sects, through Manichaeism and other routes. The almost forgotten 
      religion of the Manichees has given its name to the perception of problems 
      as a stark and simple conflict between matching forces of pure good and 
      pure evil.

      The Koran is of course strictly monotheistic, and recognizes one God, one 
      universal power only. There is a struggle in human hearts between good and 
      evil, between God's commandments and the tempter, but this is seen as a 
      struggle ordained by God, with its outcome preordained by God, serving as 
      a test of mankind, and not, as in some of the old dualist religions, a 
      struggle in which mankind has a crucial part to play in bringing about the 
      victory of good over evil. Despite this monotheism, Islam, like Judaism 
      and Christianity, was at various stages influenced, especially in Iran, by 
      the dualist idea of a cosmic clash of good and evil, light and darkness, 
      order and chaos, truth and falsehood, God and the Adversary, variously 
      known as devil, Iblis, Satan, and by other names.


      The Rise of the House of Unbelief

      IN Islam the struggle of good and evil very soon acquired political and 
      even military dimensions. Muhammad, it will be recalled, was not only a 
      prophet and a teacher, like the founders of other religions; he was also 
      the head of a polity and of a community, a ruler and a soldier. Hence his 
      struggle involved a state and its armed forces. If the fighters in the war 
      for Islam, the holy war "in the path of God," are fighting for God, it 
      follows that their opponents are fighting against God. And since God is in 
      principle the sovereign, the supreme head of the Islamic state -- and the 
      Prophet and, after the Prophet, the caliphs are his vicegerents -- then 
      God as sovereign commands the army. The army is God's army and the enemy 
      is God's enemy. The duty of God's soldiers is to dispatch God's enemies as 
      quickly as possible to the place where God will chastise them -- that is 
      to say, the afterlife.

      Clearly related to this is the basic division of mankind as perceived in 
      Islam. Most, probably all, human societies have a way of distinguishing 
      between themselves and others: insider and outsider, in-group and 
      out-group, kinsman or neighbor and foreigner. These definitions not only 
      define the outsider but also, and perhaps more particularly, help to 
      define and illustrate our perception of ourselves.

      In the classical Islamic view, to which many Muslims are beginning to 
      return, the world and all mankind are divided into two: the House of 
      Islam, where the Muslim law and faith prevail, and the rest, known as the 
      House of Unbelief or the House of War, which it is the duty of Muslims 
      ultimately to bring to Islam. But the greater part of the world is still 
      outside Islam, and even inside the Islamic lands, according to the view of 
      the Muslim radicals, the faith of Islam has been undermined and the law of 
      Islam has been abrogated. The obligation of holy war therefore begins at 
      home and continues abroad, against the same infidel enemy.

      Like every other civilization known to human history, the Muslim world in 
      its heyday saw itself as the center of truth and enlightenment, surrounded 
      by infidel barbarians whom it would in due course enlighten and civilize. 
      But between the different groups of barbarians there was a crucial 
      difference. The barbarians to the east and the south were polytheists and 
      idolaters, offering no serious threat and no competition at all to Islam. 
      In the north and west, in contrast, Muslims from an early date recognized 
      a genuine rival -- a competing world religion, a distinctive civilization 
      inspired by that religion, and an empire that, though much smaller than 
      theirs, was no less ambitious in its claims and aspirations. This was the 
      entity known to itself and others as Christendom, a term that was long 
      almost identical with Europe.

      The struggle between these rival systems has now lasted for some fourteen 
      centuries. It began with the advent of Islam, in the seventh century, and 
      has continued virtually to the present day. It has consisted of a long 
      series of attacks and counterattacks, jihads and crusades, conquests and 
      reconquests. For the first thousand years Islam was advancing, Christendom 
      in retreat and under threat. The new faith conquered the old Christian 
      lands of the Levant and North Africa, and invaded Europe, ruling for a 
      while in Sicily, Spain, Portugal, and even parts of France. The attempt by 
      the Crusaders to recover the lost lands of Christendom in the east was 
      held and thrown back, and even the Muslims' loss of southwestern Europe to 
      the Reconquista was amply compensated by the Islamic advance into 
      southeastern Europe, which twice reached as far as Vienna. For the past 
      three hundred years, since the failure of the second Turkish siege of 
      Vienna in 1683 and the rise of the European colonial empires in Asia and 
      Africa, Islam has been on the defensive, and the Christian and 
      post-Christian civilization of Europe and her daughters has brought the 
      whole world, including Islam, within its orbit.

      FOR a long time now there has been a rising tide of rebellion against this 
      Western paramountcy, and a desire to reassert Muslim values and restore 
      Muslim greatness. The Muslim has suffered successive stages of defeat. The 
      first was his loss of domination in the world, to the advancing power of 
      Russia and the West. The second was the undermining of his authority in 
      his own country, through an invasion of foreign ideas and laws and ways of 
      life and sometimes even foreign rulers or settlers, and the 
      enfranchisement of native non-Muslim elements. The third -- the last straw 
      -- was the challenge to his mastery in his own house, from emancipated 
      women and rebellious children. It was too much to endure, and the outbreak 
      of rage against these alien, infidel, and incomprehensible forces that had 
      subverted his dominance, disrupted his society, and finally violated the 
      sanctuary of his home was inevitable. It was also natural that this rage 
      should be directed primarily against the millennial enemy and should draw 
      its strength from ancient beliefs and loyalties.

      Europe and her daughters? The phrase may seem odd to Americans, whose 
      national myths, since the beginning of their nationhood and even earlier, 
      have usually defined their very identity in opposition to Europe, as 
      something new and radically different from the old European ways. This is 
      not, however, the way that others have seen it; not often in Europe, and 
      hardly ever elsewhere.

      Though people of other races and cultures participated, for the most part 
      involuntarily, in the discovery and creation of the Americas, this was, 
      and in the eyes of the rest of the world long remained, a European 
      enterprise, in which Europeans predominated and dominated and to which 
      Europeans gave their languages, their religions, and much of their way of 
      life.

      For a very long time voluntary immigration to America was almost 
      exclusively European. There were indeed some who came from the Muslim 
      lands in the Middle East and North Africa, but few were Muslims; most were 
      members of the Christian and to a lesser extent the Jewish minorities in 
      those countries. Their departure for America, and their subsequent 
      presence in America, must have strengthened rather than lessened the 
      European image of America in Muslim eyes.

      In the lands of Islam remarkably little was known about America. At first 
      the voyages of discovery aroused some interest; the only surviving copy of 
      Columbus's own map of America is a Turkish translation and adaptation, 
      still preserved in the Topkapi Palace Museum, in Istanbul. A 
      sixteenth-century Turkish geographer's account of the discovery of the New 
      World, titled The History of Western India, was one of the first books 
      printed in Turkey. But thereafter interest seems to have waned, and not 
      much is said about America in Turkish, Arabic, or other Muslim languages 
      until a relatively late date. A Moroccan ambassador who was in Spain at 
      the time wrote what must surely be the first Arabic account of the 
      American Revolution. The Sultan of Morocco signed a treaty of peace and 
      friendship with the United States in 1787, and thereafter the new republic 
      had a number of dealings, some friendly, some hostile, most commercial, 
      with other Muslim states. These seem to have had little impact on either 
      side. The American Revolution and the American republic to which it gave 
      birth long remained unnoticed and unknown. Even the small but growing 
      American presence in Muslim lands in the nineteenth century -- merchants, 
      consuls, missionaries, and teachers -- aroused little or no curiosity, and 
      is almost unmentioned in the Muslim litetature and newspapers of the time.

      The Second World War, the oil industry, and postwar developments brought 
      many Americans to the Islamic lands; increasing numbers of Muslims also 
      came to America, first as students, then as teachers or businessmen or 
      other visitors, and eventually as immigrants. Cinema and later television 
      brought the American way of life, or at any rate a certain version of it, 
      before countless millions to whom the very name of America had previously 
      been meaningless or unknown. A wide range of American products, 
      particularly in the immediate postwar years, when European competition was 
      virtually eliminated and Japanese competition had not yet arisen, reached 
      into the remotest markets of the Muslim world, winning new customers and, 
      perhaps more important, creating new tastes and ambitions. For some, 
      America represented freedom and justice and opportunity. For many more, it 
      represented wealth and power and success, at a time when these qualities 
      were not regarded as sins or crimes.

      And then came the great change, when the leaders of a widespread and 
      widening religious revival sought out and identified their enemies as the 
      enemies of God, and gave them "a local habitation and a name" in the 
      Western Hemisphere. Suddenly, or so it seemed, America had become the 
      archenemy, the incarnation of evil, the diabolic opponent of all that is 
      good, and specifically, for Muslims, of Islam. Why?


      Some Familiar Accusations

      Among the components in the mood of anti-Westernism, and more especially 
      of anti-Americanism, were certain intellectual influences coming from 
      Europe. One of these was from Germany, where a negative view of America 
      formed part of a school of thought by no means limited to the Nazis but 
      including writers as diverse as Rainer Maria Rilke, Ernst Junger, and 
      Martin Heidegger. In this perception, America was the ultimate example of 
      civilization without culture: rich and comfortable, materially advanced 
      but soulless and artificial; assembled or at best constructed, not grown; 
      mechanical, not organic; technologically complex but lacking the 
      spirituality and vitality of the rooted, human, national cultures of the 
      Germans and other "authentic" peoples. German philosophy, and particularly 
      the philosophy of education, enjoyed a considerable vogue among Arab and 
      some other Muslim intellectuals in the thirties and early forties, and 
      this philosophic anti-Americanism was part of the message.

      After the collapse of the Third Reich and the temporary ending of German 
      influence, another philosophy, even more anti-American, took its place -- 
      the Soviet version of Marxism, with a denunciation of Western capitalism 
      and of America as its most advanced and dangerous embodiment. And when 
      Soviet influence began to fade, there was yet another to take its place, 
      or at least to supplement its working -- the new mystique of Third 
      Worldism, emanating from Western Europe, particularly France, and later 
      also from the United States, and drawing at times on both these earlier 
      philosophies. This mystique was helped by the universal human tendency to 
      invent a golden age in the past, and the specifically European propensity 
      to locate it elsewhere. A new variant of the old golden-age myth placed it 
      in the Third World, where the innocence of the non-Western Adam and Eve 
      was ruined by the Western serpent. This view took as axiomatic the 
      goodness and purity of the East and the wickedness of the West, expanding 
      in an exponential curve of evil from Western Europe to the United States. 
      These ideas, too, fell on fertile ground, and won widespread support.

      But though these imported philosophies helped to provide intellectual 
      expression for anti-Westernism and anti-Americanism, they did not cause 
      it, and certainly they do not explain the widespread anti-Westernism that 
      made so many in the Middle East and elsewhere in the Islamic world 
      receptive to such ideas.

      It must surely be clear that what won support for such totally diverse 
      doctrines was not Nazi race theory, which can have had little appeal for 
      Arabs, or Soviet atheistic communism, which can have had little appeal for 
      Muslims, but rather their common anti-Westernism. Nazism and communism 
      were the main forces opposed to the West, both as a way of life and as a 
      power in the world, and as such they could count on at least the sympathy 
      if not the support of those who saw in the West their principal enemy.

      But why the hostility in the first place? If we turn from the general to 
      the specific, there is no lack of individual policies and actions, pursued 
      and taken by individual Western governments, that have aroused the 
      passionate anger of Middle Eastern and other Islamic peoples. Yet all too 
      often, when these policies are abandoned and the problems resolved, there 
      is only a local and temporary alleviation. The French have left Algeria, 
      the British have left Egypt, the Western oil companies have left their oil 
      wells, the westernizing Shah has left Iran -- yet the generalized 
      resentment of the fundamentalists and other extremists against the West 
      and its friends remains and grows and is not appeased.

      The cause most frequently adduced for anti-American feeling among Muslims 
      today is American support for Israel. This support is certainly a factor 
      of importance, increasing with nearness and involvement. But here again 
      there are some oddities, difficult to explain in terms of a single, simple 
      cause. In the early days of the foundation of Israel, while the United 
      States maintained a certain distance, the Soviet Union granted immediate 
      de jure recognition and support, and arms sent from a Soviet satellite, 
      Czechoslovakia, saved the infant state of Israel from defeat and death in 
      its first weeks of life. Yet there seems to have been no great ill will 
      toward the Soviets for these policies, and no corresponding good will 
      toward the United States. In 1956 it was the United States that 
      intervened, forcefully and decisively, to secure the withdrawal of 
      Israeli, British, and French forces from Egypt -- yet in the late fifties 
      and sixties it was to the Soviets, not America, that the rulers of Egypt, 
      Syria, Iraq, and other states turned for arms; it was with the Soviet bloc 
      that they formed bonds of solidarity at the United Nations and in the 
      world generally. More recently, the rulers of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
      have offered the most principled and uncompromising denunciation of Israel 
      and Zionism. Yet even these leaders, before as well as after the death of 
      Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, when they decided for reasons of their own to 
      enter into a dialogue of sorts, found it easier to talk to Jerusalem than 
      to Washington. At the same time, Western hostages in Lebanon, many of them 
      devoted to Arab causes and some of them converts to Islam, are seen and 
      treated by their captors as limbs of the Great Satan.

      Another explanation, more often heard from Muslim dissidents, attributes 
      anti-American feeling to American support for hated regimes, seen as 
      reactionary by radicals, as impious by conservatives, as corrupt and 
      tyrannical by both. This accusation has some plausibility, and could help 
      to explain why an essentially inner-directed, often anti-nationalist 
      movement should turn against a foreign power. But it does not suffice, 
      especially since support for such regimes has been limited both in extent 
      and -- as the Shah discovered -- in effectiveness.

      Clearly, something deeper is involved than these specific grievances, 
      numerous and important as they may be -- something deeper that turns every 
      disagreement into a problem and makes every problem insoluble.



      THIS revulsion against America, more generally against the West, is by no 
      means limited to the Muslim world; nor have Muslims, with the exception of 
      the Iranian mullahs and their disciples elsewhere, experienced and 
      exhibited the more virulent forms of this feeling. The mood of 
      disillusionment and hostility has affected many other parts of the world, 
      and has even reached some elements in the United States. It is from these 
      last, speaking for themselves and claiming to speak for the oppressed 
      peoples of the Third World, that the most widely publicized explanations 
      -- and justifications -- of this rejection of Western civilization and its 
      values have of late been heard.

      The accusations are familiar. We of the West are accused of sexism, 
      racism, and imperialism, institutionalized in patriarchy and slavery, 
      tyranny and exploitation. To these charges, and to others as heinous, we 
      have no option but to plead guilty -- not as Americans, nor yet as 
      Westerners, but simply as human beings, as members of the human race. In 
      none of these sins are we the only sinners, and in some of them we are 
      very far from being the worst. The treatment of women in the Western 
      world, and more generally in Christendom, has always been unequal and 
      often oppressive, but even at its worst it was rather better than the rule 
      of polygamy and concubinage that has otherwise been the almost universal 
      lot of womankind on this planet.

      Is racism, then, the main grievance? Certainly the word figures 
      prominently in publicity addressed to Western, Eastern European, and some 
      Third World audiences. It figures less prominently in what is written and 
      published for home consumption, and has become a generalized and 
      meaningless term of abuse -- rather like "fascism," which is nowadays 
      imputed to opponents even by spokesmen for one-party, nationalist 
      dictatorships of various complexions and shirt colors.

      Slavery is today universally denounced as an offense against humanity, but 
      within living memory it has been practiced and even defended as a 
      necessary institution, established and regulated by divine law. The 
      peculiarity of the peculiar institution, as Americans once called it, lay 
      not in its existence but in its abolition. Westerners were the first to 
      break the consensus of acceptance and to outlaw slavery, first at home, 
      then in the other territories they controlled, and finally wherever in the 
      world they were able to exercise power or influence -- in a word, by means 
      of imperialism.

      Is imperialism, then, the grievance? Some Western powers, and in a sense 
      Western civilization as a whole, have certainly been guilty of 
      imperialism, but are we really to believe that in the expansion of Western 
      Europe there was a quality of moral delinquency lacking in such earlier, 
      relatively innocent expansions as those of the Arabs or the Mongols or the 
      Ottomans, or in more recent expansions such as that which brought the 
      rulers of Muscovy to the Baltic, the Black Sea, the Caspian, the Hindu 
      Kush, and the Pacific Ocean? In having practiced sexism, racism, and 
      imperialism, the West was merely following the common practice of mankind 
      through the millennia of recorded history. Where it is distinct from all 
      other civilizations is in having recognized, named, and tried, not 
      entirely without success, to remedy these historic diseases. And that is 
      surely a matter for congratulation, not condemnation. We do not hold 
      Western medical science in general, or Dr. Parkinson and Dr. Alzheimer in 
      particular, responsible for the diseases they diagnosed and to which they 
      gave their names.

      Of all these offenses the one that is most widely, frequently, and 
      vehemently denounced is undoubtedly imperialism -- sometimes just Western, 
      sometimes Eastern (that is, Soviet) and Western alike. But the way this 
      term is used in the literature of Islamic fundamentalists often suggests 
      that it may not carry quite the same meaning for them as for its Western 
      critics. In many of these writings the term "imperialist" is given a 
      distinctly religious significance, being used in association, and 
      sometimes interchangeably, with "missionary," and denoting a form of 
      attack that includes the Crusades as well as the modern colonial empires. 
      One also sometimes gets the impression that the offense of imperialism is 
      not -- as for Western critics -- the domination by one people over another 
      but rather the allocation of roles in this relationship. What is truly 
      evil and unacceptable is the domination of infidels over true believers. 
      For true believers to rule misbelievers is proper and natural, since this 
      provides for the maintenance of the holy law, and gives the misbelievers 
      both the opportunity and the incentive to embrace the true faith. But for 
      misbelievers to rule over true believers is blasphemous and unnatural, 
      since it leads to the corruption of religion and morality in society, and 
      to the flouting or even the abrogation of God's law. This may help us to 
      understand the current troubles in such diverse places as Ethiopian 
      Eritrea, Indian Kashmir, Chinese Sinkiang, and Yugoslav Kossovo, in all of 
      which Muslim populations are ruled by non-Muslim governments. It may also 
      explain why spokesmen for the new Muslim minorities in Western Europe 
      demand for Islam a degree of legal protection which those countries no 
      longer give to Christianity and have never given to Judaism. Nor, of 
      course, did the governments of the countries of origin of these Muslim 
      spokesmen ever accord such protection to religions other than their own. 
      In their perception, there is no contradiction in these attitudes. The 
      true faith, based on God's final revelation, must be protected from insult 
      and abuse; other faiths, being either false or incomplete, have no right 
      to any such protection.

      THERE are other difficulties in the way of accepting imperialism as an 
      explanation of Muslim hostility, even if we define imperialism narrowly 
      and specifically, as the invasion and domination of Muslim countries by 
      non-Muslims. If the hostility is directed against imperialism in that 
      sense, why has it been so much stronger against Western Europe, which has 
      relinquished all its Muslim possessions and dependencies, than against 
      Russia, which still rules, with no light hand, over many millions of 
      reluctant Muslim subjects and over ancient Muslim cities and countries? 
      And why should it include the United States, which, apart from a brief 
      interlude in the Muslim-minority area of the Philippines, has never ruled 
      any Muslim population? The last surviving European empire with Muslim 
      subjects, that of the Soviet Union, far from being the target of criticism 
      and attack, has been almost exempt. Even the most recent repressions of 
      Muslim revolts in the southern and central Asian republics of the USSR 
      incurred no more than relatively mild words of expostulation, coupled with 
      a disclaimer of any desire to interfere in what are quaintly called the 
      "internal affairs" of the USSR and a request for the preservation of order 
      and tranquillity on the frontier.

      One reason for this somewhat surprising restraint is to be found in the 
      nature of events in Soviet Azerbaijan. Islam is obviously an important and 
      potentially a growing element in the Azerbaijani sense of identity, but it 
      is not at present a dominant element, and the Azerbaijani movement has 
      more in common with the liberal patriotism of Europe than with Islamic 
      fundamentalism. Such a movement would not arouse the sympathy of the 
      rulers of the Islamic Republic. It might even alarm them, since a 
      genuinely democratic national state run by the people of Soviet Azerbaijan 
      would exercise a powerful attraction on their kinsmen immediately to the 
      south, in Iranian Azerbaijan.

      Another reason for this relative lack of concern for the 50 million or 
      more Muslims under Soviet rule may be a calculation of risk and advantage. 
      The Soviet Union is near, along the northern frontiers of Turkey, Iran, 
      and Afghanistan; America and even Western Europe are far away. More to the 
      point, it has not hitherto been the practice of the Soviets to quell 
      disturbances with water cannon and rubber bullets, with TV cameras in 
      attendance, or to release arrested persons on bail and allow them access 
      to domestic and foreign media. The Soviets do not interview their harshest 
      critics on prime time, or tempt them with teaching, lecturing, and writing 
      engagements. On the contrary, their ways of indicating displeasure with 
      criticism can often be quite disagreeable.

      But fear of reprisals, though no doubt important, is not the only or 
      perhaps even the principal reason for the relatively minor place assigned 
      to the Soviet Union, as compared with the West, in the demonology of 
      fundamentalism. After all, the great social and intellectual and economic 
      changes that have transformed most of the Islamic world, and given rise to 
      such commonly denounced Western evils as consumerism and secularism, 
      emerged from the West, not from the Soviet Union. No one could accuse the 
      Soviets of consumerism; their materialism is philosophic -- to be precise, 
      dialectical -- and has little or nothing to do in practice with providing 
      the good things of life. Such provision represents another kind of 
      materialism, often designated by its opponents as crass. It is associated 
      with the capitalist West and not with the communist East, which has 
      practiced, or at least imposed on its subjects, a degree of austerity that 
      would impress a Sufi saint.

      Nor were the Soviets, until very recently, vulnerable to charges of 
      secularism, the other great fundamentalist accusation against the West. 
      Though atheist, they were not godless, and had in fact created an 
      elaborate state apparatus to impose the worship of their gods -- an 
      apparatus with its own orthodoxy, a hierarchy to define and enforce it, 
      and an armed inquisition to detect and extirpate heresy. The separation of 
      religion from the state does not mean the establishment of irreligion by 
      the state, still less the forcible imposition of an anti-religious 
      philosophy. Soviet secularism, like Soviet consumerism, holds no 
      temptation for the Muslim masses, and is losing what appeal it had for 
      Muslim intellectuals. More than ever before it is Western capitalism and 
      democracy that provide an authentic and attractive alternative to 
      traditional ways of thought and life. Fundamentalist leaders are not 
      mistaken in seeing in Western civilization the greatest challenge to the 
      way of life that they wish to retain or restore for their people.


      A Clash of Civilizations

      THE origins of secularism in the west may be found in two circumstances -- 
      in early Christian teachings and, still more, experience, which created 
      two institutions, Church and State; and in later Christian conflicts, 
      which drove the two apart. Muslims, too, had their religious 
      disagreements, but there was nothing remotely approaching the ferocity of 
      the Christian struggles between Protestants and Catholics, which 
      devastated Christian Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and 
      finally drove Christians in desperation to evolve a doctrine of the 
      separation of religion from the state. Only by depriving religious 
      institutions of coercive power, it seemed, could Christendom restrain the 
      murderous intolerance and persecution that Christians had visited on 
      followers of other religions and, most of all, on those who professed 
      other forms of their own.

      Muslims experienced no such need and evolved no such doctrine. There was 
      no need for secularism in Islam, and even its pluralism was very different 
      from that of the pagan Roman Empire, so vividly described by Edward Gibbon 
      when he remarked that "the various modes of worship, which prevailed in 
      the Roman world, were all considered by the people, as equally true; by 
      the philosopher, as equally false; and by the magistrate, as equally 
      useful." Islam was never prepared, either in theory or in practice, to 
      accord full equality to those who held other beliefs and practiced other 
      forms of worship. It did, however, accord to the holders of partial truth 
      a degree of practical as well as theoretical tolerance rarely paralleled 
      in the Christian world until the West adopted a measure of secularism in 
      the late-seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

      At first the Muslim response to Western civilization was one of admiration 
      and emulation -- an immense respect for the achievements of the West, and 
      a desire to imitate and adopt them. This desire arose from a keen and 
      growing awareness of the weakness, poverty, and backwardness of the 
      Islamic world as compared with the advancing West. The disparity first 
      became apparent on the battlefield but soon spread to other areas of human 
      activity. Muslim writers observed and described the wealth and power of 
      the West, its science and technology, its manufactures, and its forms of 
      government. For a time the secret of Western success was seen to lie in 
      two achievements: economic advancement and especially industry; political 
      institutions and especially freedom. Several generations of reformers and 
      modernizers tried to adapt these and introduce them to their own 
      countries, in the hope that they would thereby be able to achieve equality 
      with the West and perhaps restore their lost superiority.

      In our own time this mood of admiration and emulation has, among many 
      Muslims, given way to one of hostility and rejection. In part this mood is 
      surely due to a feeling of humiliation -- a growing awareness, among the 
      heirs of an old, proud, and long dominant civilization, of having been 
      overtaken, overborne, and overwhelmed by those whom they regarded as their 
      inferiors. In part this mood is due to events in the Western world itself. 
      One factor of major importance was certainly the impact of two great 
      suicidal wars, in which Western civilization tore itself apart, bringing 
      untold destruction to its own and other peoples, and in which the 
      belligerents conducted an immense propaganda effort, in the Islamic world 
      and elsewhere, to discredit and undermine each other. The message they 
      brought found many listeners, who were all the more ready to respond in 
      that their own experience of Western ways was not happy. The introduction 
      of Western commercial, financial, and industrial methods did indeed bring 
      great wealth, but it accrued to transplanted Westerners and members of 
      Westernized minorities, and to only a few among the mainstream Muslim 
      population. In time these few became more numerous, but they remained 
      isolated from the masses, differing from them even in their dress and 
      style of life. Inevitably they were seen as agents of and collaborators 
      with what was once again regarded as a hostile world. Even the political 
      institutions that had come from the West were discredited, being judged 
      not by their Western originals but by their local imitations, installed by 
      enthusiastic Muslim reformers. These, operating in a situation beyond 
      their control, using imported and inappropriate methods that they did not 
      fully understand, were unable to cope with the rapidly developing crises 
      and were one by one overthrown. For vast numbers of Middle Easterners, 
      Western-style economic methods brought poverty, Western-style political 
      institutions brought tyranny, even Western-style warfare brought defeat. 
      It is hardly surprising that so many were willing to listen to voices 
      telling them that the old Islamic ways were best and that their only 
      salvation was to throw aside the pagan innovations of the reformers and 
      return to the True Path that God had prescribed for his people.

      ULTIMATELY, the struggle of the fundamentalists is against two enemies, 
      secularism and modernism. The war against secularism is conscious and 
      explicit, and there is by now a whole literature denouncing secularism as 
      an evil neo-pagan force in the modern world and attributing it variously 
      to the Jews, the West, and the United States. The war against modernity is 
      for the most part neither conscious nor explicit, and is directed against 
      the whole process of change that has taken place in the Islamic world in 
      the past century or more and has transformed the political, economic, 
      social, and even cultural structures of Muslim countries. Islamic 
      fundamentalism has given an aim and a form to the otherwise aimless and 
      formless resentment and anger of the Muslim masses at the forces that have 
      devalued their traditional values and loyalties and, in the final 
      analysis, robbed them of their beliefs, their aspirations, their dignity, 
      and to an increasing extent even their livelihood.

      There is something in the religious culture of Islam which inspired, in 
      even the humblest peasant or peddler, a dignity and a courtesy toward 
      others never exceeded and rarely equalled in other civilizations. And yet, 
      in moments of upheaval and disruption, when the deeper passions are 
      stirred, this dignity and courtesy toward others can give way to an 
      explosive mixture of rage and hatred which impels even the government of 
      an ancient and civilized country -- even the spokesman of a great 
      spiritual and ethical religion -- to espouse kidnapping and assassination, 
      and try to find, in the life of their Prophet, approval and indeed 
      precedent for such actions.

      The instinct of the masses is not false in locating the ultimate source of 
      these cataclysmic changes in the West and in attributing the disruption of 
      their old way of life to the impact of Western domination, Western 
      influence, or Western precept and example. And since the United States is 
      the legitimate heir of European civilization and the recognized and 
      unchallenged leader of the West, the United States has inherited the 
      resulting grievances and become the focus for the pent-up hate and anger. 
      Two examples may suffice. In November of 1979 an angry mob attacked and 
      burned the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan. The stated cause of the 
      crowd's anger was the seizure of the Great Mosque in Mecca by a group of 
      Muslim dissidents -- an event in which there was no American involvement 
      whatsoever. Almost ten years later, in February of 1989, again in 
      Islamabad, the USIS center was attacked by angry crowds, this time to 
      protest the publication of Salman Rushdie's Satanic Verses. Rushdie is a 
      British citizen of Indian birth, and his book had been published five 
      months previously in England. But what provoked the mob's anger, and also 
      the Ayatollah Khomeini's subsequent pronouncement of a death sentence on 
      the author, was the publication of the book in the United States.

      It should by now be clear that we are facing a mood and a movement far 
      transcending the level of issues and policies and the governments that 
      pursue them. This is no less than a clash of civilizations -- the perhaps 
      irrational but surely historic reaction of an ancient rival against our 
      Judeo-Christian heritage, our secular present, and the worldwide expansion 
      of both. It is crucially important that we on our side should not be 
      provoked into an equally historic but also equally irrational reaction 
      against that rival.

      Not all the ideas imported from the West by Western intruders or native 
      Westernizers have been rejected. Some have been accepted by even the most 
      radical Islamic fundamentalists, usually without acknowledgment of source, 
      and suffering a sea change into something rarely rich but often strange. 
      One such was political freedom, with the associated notions and practices 
      of representation, election, and constitutional government. Even the 
      Islamic Republic of Iran has a written constitution and an elected 
      assembly, as well as a kind of episcopate, for none of which is there any 
      prescription in Islamic teaching or any precedent in the Islamic past. All 
      these institutions are clearly adapted from Western models. Muslim states 
      have also retained many of the cultural and social customs of the West and 
      the symbols that express them, such as the form and style of male (and to 
      a much lesser extent female) clothing, notably in the military. The use of 
      Western-invented guns and tanks and planes is a military necessity, but 
      the continued use of fitted tunics and peaked caps is a cultural choice. 
      From constitutions to Coca-Cola, from tanks and television to T-shirts, 
      the symbols and artifacts, and through them the ideas, of the West have 
      retained -- even strengthened -- their appeal.

      THE movement nowadays called fundamentalism is not the only Islamic 
      tradition. There are others, more tolerant, more open, that helped to 
      inspire the great achievements of Islamic civilization in the past, and we 
      may hope that these other traditions will in time prevail. But before this 
      issue is decided there will be a hard struggle, in which we of the West 
      can do little or nothing. Even the attempt might do harm, for these are 
      issues that Muslims must decide among themselves. And in the meantime we 
      must take great care on all sides to avoid the danger of a new era of 
      religious wars, arising from the exacerbation of differences and the 
      revival of ancient prejudices.

      To this end we must strive to achieve a better appreciation of other 
      religious and political cultures, through the study of their history, 
      their literature, and their achievements. At the same time, we may hope 
      that they will try to achieve a better understanding of ours, and 
      especially that they will understand and respect, even if they do not 
      choose to adopt for themselves, our Western perception of the proper 
      relationship between religion and politics. To describe this perception I 
      shall end as I began, with a quotation from an American President, this 
      time not the justly celebrated Thomas Jefferson but the somewhat unjustly 
      neglected John Tyler, who, in a letter dated July 10, 1843, gave eloquent 
      and indeed prophetic expression to the principle of religious freedom:


        The United States have adventured upon a great and noble experiment, 
        which is believed to have been hazarded in the absence of all previous 
        precedent -- that of total separation of Church and State. No religious 
        establishment by law exists among us. The conscience is left free from 
        all restraint and each is permitted to worship his Maker after his own 
        judgement. The offices of the Government are open alike to all. No 
        tithes are levied to support an established Hierarchy, nor is the 
        fallible judgement of man set up as the sure and infallible creed of 
        faith. The Mahommedan, if he will to come among us would have the 
        privilege guaranteed to him by the constitution to worship according to 
        the Koran; and the East Indian might erect a shrine to Brahma if it so 
        pleased him. Such is the spirit of toleration inculcated by our 
        political Institutions.... The Hebrew persecuted and down trodden in 
        other regions takes up his abode among us with none to make him 
        afraid.... and the Aegis of the Government is over him to defend and 
        protect him. Such is the great experiment which we have tried, and such 
        are the happy fruits which have resulted from it; our system of free 
        government would be imperfect without it.

        The body may be oppressed and manacled and yet survive; but if the mind 
        of man be fettered, its energies and faculties perish, and what remains 
        is of the earth, earthly. Mind should be free as the light or as the 
air.



      The online version of this article appears in two parts. Click here to go 
      to part one.


      Copyright © 1990 by Bernard Lewis. All rights reserved. 
      The Atlantic Monthly; September 1990; The Roots of Muslim Rage; Volume 
      266, No. 3; pages 47 - 60. 



















