Subject: INTERVIEW: M Lilla on violence loving intellectuals & his The
         Reckless Mind: Intellectuals in Politics


"Q & A: Why Are Deep Thinkers Shallow About Tyranny?"
An interview with Mark Lilla, author of _The Reckless Mind_
New York Times November 10, 2001



Mark Lilla, a professor at the Committee on Social Thought at the University
of Chicago, recently published The Reckless Mind: Intellectuals in
Politics,

[amazon  http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0940322765/thefriedrhayeksc ]

about how writers and intellectuals have ended up justifying
communism, fascism and other tyrannies. Eric Alterman spoke with him.


Is there a special gene among intellectuals that lends itself to the embrace
of tyranny? Are they less sensible than the general populace?


If by "intellectuals" we mean those devoted to the life of the mind, we can
see why they face more intensely a problem all human beings face: that of
negotiating the distance between ideas and social reality. What
intellectuals are prone to forget is that this distance poses not only
conceptual difficulties but ethical ones as well. It is a moral challenge to
determine how to comport oneself simultaneously in relation to abstract
ideas and a recalcitrant world.


Do you think a philosopher's political mistakes, like Heidegger's Nazism or
Sartre's infantile Maoism, can destroy the value of their philosophical
insights?


I do not think the truth or value of Euclid's proofs are affected by how he
may have treated his servants. But philosophy, when it is not a merely
formal or symbolic exercise, is ultimately driven by the desire to find the
right way to live, individually and collectively. We only take thinkers
seriously when we consider their ideas in terms of their deepest motivations
and most obvious consequences. We owe it to them, and ultimately to
ourselves, to reflect on these connections.


Are American intellectuals any more or less likely to embrace tyranny than
European intellectuals?


Twentieth-century continental and American intellectuals have been attracted
to tyranny for different reasons. In Europe the issue since the French
Revolution has been the legitimacy of the modern age: secularity, democracy,
capitalism, and bourgeois culture. There the intellectual temptation has
been to seek a return to some imaginary pre- modern idyll or the elimination
of one or more aspects of modern life, especially bourgeois capitalism. For
200 years continental intellectuals flirted with tyrants who promised
radical alternatives to modern life and heaped contempt on those who engaged
in meliorist reforms of that life.


American intellectuals are thoroughly modern and bourgeois. When they
embrace tyranny it is usually out of ignorance and a naïve optimism about
human nature. We Americans find it easy to assume that political cut-throats
are just misunderstood delinquents and that their tyrannical practices are
expressions of cultural differences we should tolerate. To read such
statements today about the fascists, Stalinism, the East bloc, and
third-world dictators is quite chilling. Our own modern democratic and
bourgeois convictions are so strong that we have trouble grasping political
phenomena not governed by our rules.


You say Americans have misunderstood Michel Foucault's ideas about
oppression in everyday institutions and Jacques Derrida's notion about the
linguistic construction of reality. Why?


The misunderstanding is bred of American optimism and provinciality.
Americans take legitimacy for granted, so they fail to take seriously the
illiberal and antimodern implications of certain European ideas they glean
from translations and domesticate into English. When Foucault speaks darkly
of "power" and Derrida of "deconstruction," they may very well be right. But
if they are, that means that most of what their American proponents believe
about individualism, freedom, democracy and justice is wrong.


Does terrorism lend itself to an intellectual's embrace as well?


Certainly there has been a fascination with "purifying" violence and terror
in 20th-century intellectual life, as we see in the works of Sorel,
Merleau-Ponty and Foucault. Yet it is also true that certain terroristic
acts have woken people up, ending their illusions and their romanticization
of the "other." I think here of the Cambodia massacres, the Munich Olympics,
the Schleyer killing in Germany in the 70's. [Hanns-Martin Schleyer was head
of the German business association and was murdered by the Red Army Faction
in the fall of 1977.]


How is it that intellectuals fall prey to what you call "philotyranny,"
denying the nature of tyranny by romanticizing or excusing it, or denying
any fundamental difference between tyrannical and democratic regimes.


Political and intellectual life share a basis not only in reason but in the
passions. Passion is not necessarily a bad thing: there are healthy passions
for truth and justice that need to be cultivated. But those passions also
need to be controlled, since they can make us mistake lies for truth and
tyranny for justice.


Is there a useful or proper role for intellectuals and philosophers to
fulfill in politics?


Modern democratic life poses a unique challenge to intellectuals because it
is prosaic, operates through public institutions, relies on specialized
knowledge and respects common opinion. Intellectuals, even (perhaps
especially) those on the left, are aristocrats by nature: they have contempt
for ordinary opinion and are impatient with technicalities and formalities.
Modesty is the most difficult virtue for intellectuals to learn, but it is
the most important one in democratic society.


In studying this topic, which modern writers and thinkers strike you as
having found the proper balance between thought and action?


The intellectuals of our time I have most admired as models of probity and
good sense were Raymond Aron and Isaiah Berlin. Aron, because he punctured
the myth of the intellectual as moral critic "speaking truth to power." He
understood that thinking responsibly in modern democratic society means
mastering the complexities of that society and putting oneself in the shoes
of those who must make decisions. Berlin, because he understood the romantic
yearnings and discontents of the modern mind, yet also knew that they lay at
the root of all the political disasters of our time.


Have you ever felt yourself falling prey to any of the dangers you describe
in your book?


I've been tempted — if we don't think passionately we are not really
thinking. And if we are not thinking we are not really alive.




Mark Lilla, _The Reckless Mind: Intellectuals in Politics_
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0940322765/thefriedrhayeksc
