      The Daily Telegraph - Opinion


      Monday 17 Sep 2001
      Issue number 45510
       
      
       www.dailytelegraph.com/opinion 


            A religion that sanctions violence

            By Patrick Sookhdeo
      
            UNTIL recently, Islam has had a negative and violent image in the 
            West, but now the trend is to focus on Islam as a religion of peace.
            Since the World Trade Centre attack, there has been a flood of 
            statements and articles making these assertions. A recent BBC2 
            series formed part of this trend, as did John Casey's article in 
            praise of Islam in this newspaper. These sentiments were echoed by 
            Tony Blair: last week he said that "such acts of infamy and cruelty 
            are wholly contrary to the Islamic faith".

            We are often told that the word Islam means "peace". We seem to have 
            gone from one extreme to the other. Now that Islam is no longer 
            demonised, it seems it can do no wrong. Perhaps the truth is that 
            the two opposing strands need to be held together, instead of 
            dismissing one or the other. The reality of Islam is more complex. 
            Islam actually means "submission" - not quite the same as "peace". 
            Many horrific acts have been, and continue to be, perpetrated in the 
            name of Islam, just as they have in the name of Christianity. But, 
            unlike Islam, Christianity does not justify the use of all forms of 
            violence. Islam does.

            There have been reports that Muslims fear revenge attacks. In 
            America and Britain, there have been stories of intimidation. 
            Attacks on Muslims and on peace can never be justified, but the 
            answer is not to forfeit justice or to ignore truth.
            The contradictory reactions to the terrorist attacks - official 
            condemnation at leadership level and support among many people - are 
            an indication that Islam is not always "a religion of peace". There 
            are so many Muslims rejoicing at the tragic loss of American lives 
            and the humiliation of the American government that they cannot be 
            dismissed as "a few extremists".

            Sura 9, verse 5 of the Koran reads, "Then fight and slay the Pagans 
            wherever ye find them. And seize them, beleaguer them, And lie in 
            wait for them, In every stratagem (of war)." The note that 
            accompanies this verse in the respected A Yusuf Ali translation 
            states that "when war becomes inevitable it must be pursued with 
            vigour The fighting may take the form of slaughter, or capture, or 
            siege, or ambush and other stratagems."

            In the Muslim faith, the Koran is believed to be the very word of 
            God, applying to all people, in all times, in all places. It is the 
            source of the Muslim faith and the law that orders the Islamic way 
            of life. Killing is not totally forbidden: in fact, it was through 
            conquest that Islam spread. In Indonesia today, non-Muslims are 
            offered a choice of conversion to Islam or death. The argument that 
            the above verse was written to refer only to a particular time and 
            people is not valid. The Koran is considered immutable - a fact that 
            has been repeatedly employed to justify verses that are 
            discriminatory toward women, such as the unequal inheritance shares 
            given to women in line with Sura 4, verse 11.

            The development of Shariah, Islamic law, created a society where 
            non-Muslims lived as second-class citizens subject to and humiliated 
            by numerous laws. Those who converted from Islam to another religion 
            were killed, a practice that continues in Afghanistan, Iran and 
            Saudi Arabia. Koran Sura 5, verse 85, which speaks of enmity between 
            Muslims and non-Muslims, reads: "Strongest among men in enmity to 
            the Believers wilt thou Find the Jews and Pagans."

            The World Trade Centre attack cannot be dismissed as merely the work 
            of a small group of extremists. The Muslims celebrating the tragedy 
            in America are doubtless recalling the words of the Koran, urging 
            Muslims to "fight a mighty nation, fight them until they embrace 
            Islam". Sheikh Omar Bakri Mohamed, leader of the radical Islamic 
            organisation Al-Muhajiroun, last week indicated that civilian 
            targets were wrong, but military and government targets are 
            legitimate. The Kuwaiti paper Al-Watan argued in favour of the 
            Islamic justification for killing non-combatants. It referred 
            specifically to Jews, but its argument could apply to any 
            non-combatants living in a democracy. Citizens vote for the 
            government and pay taxes to support it. And so, the argument goes, 
            citizens can be considered as potential soldiers or as being 
            "involved in complementary activities". 

            To recognise that no culture or people are without fault and that 
            all should be subject to criticism is not racism; it is an honesty 
            that emphasises our common humanity. The way to increase respect 
            between people of different faiths is not to gloss over our problems 
            but to admit them, face up to them and together seek to deal with 
            them. Violence occurs in all religions, but in most it is not 
            sanctioned and although there might be moderate elements within 
            Islam, it is the extremist elements that have tended to dominate the 
            development of the religion, with often tragic consequences. 

            Patrick Sookhdeo is the director of the Institute for the Study of 
            Islam and Christianity

