



LIFE DURING WARTIME 
War of the Worlds 
The West must stop apologizing for the greatness of our civilization. 
BY SHELBY STEELE 
Monday, September 17, 2001 12:01 



A week ago today, I set out to write a piece for this page on the 
recent United Nations conference against racism and intolerance in Durban, South 
Africa. My point was to be that the conference was an absurd and theatrical 
confrontation of First World guilt and Third World anger born of ineffectuality. 
Then, after last Tuesday morning, I put all that aside. Against the horrors of 
that day, the conference seemed remarkably trivial. But now I believe there is a 
relationship between that bizarre little conference and Tuesday's horrors. 

After all, Tuesday's events were also a collision of the First and Third worlds, and I 
believe their subtext was also one of Western guilt and Third World 
ineffectuality. In looking at difficulties in the black American community over 
the years, it has always astounded me how much white Americans take for granted 
the rich and utterly decisive heritage of Western culture. There is no space 
here to reiterate the vast and invisible web of ideas, principles, values and 
understandings that have evolved over the millennia to undergird the American 
civilization. 

To mention only the fewest highlights, there was the magnificence 
of Greek thought, the Roman development of law, a renaissance of reason, the 
concept of a social contract, the idea of the individual as a self-contained and 
free political unit with rights and responsibilities, free markets, the 
scientific method, separation of church and state--all this and so much more 
converging to make the American and Western way of life successful in so many 
ways. It is not too much to say, as Francis Fukuyama did a few years back, that 
the West now represents--all things considered--the Hegelian "end of history." 


If the Second and Third worlds now "Americanize," it is more out of Darwinism 
than a love of blue jeans and Big Macs. The evil of slavery and colonialism was 
that these oppressions kept their victims out of history, disconnected them from 
the evolutionary struggle. The great white advantage has been living inside 
history, adapting to its constant demands, nurturing the values and the habits 
of life that allow one to keep pace. This is the cultural capital that whites 
too often take for granted and rarely think of insisting on in the former 
victims of exclusion. It is so easy to look at minority weakness and think of 
sweeping programmatic solutions when a simple insistence on responsibility for 
one's own development might serve far better. (After all, this is how Israel 
came to thrive after the Holocaust.) Oppression made such attitudes irrelevant, 
so that even when freedom came there was an incomplete knowledge of how to seize 
it. And this is where a new kind of trouble began. Where slavery and colonialism 
once imposed inferiority, new freedom has too often only added the fresh 
embarrassment of inferiority without the excuse of oppression. 

I think the Durban conference was inspired by this embarrassment. Its founders realized they 
would never get reparations of any significance. The wiser among them know that 
reparations are no answer anyway. I believe this conference--with its almost 
religious embrace of victimization--wanted to keep racism alive as a face-saving 
excuse, to let it temper the shame of so much ineffectuality in the face of 
freedom, so much correlation between independence and decline. Today the First 
World is dealing with an embarrassed Third World that is driven to save face 
against the anguish of an inferiority that is less and less blamable on others. 


The deep appeal of a Jesse Jackson or a Yasser Arafat, one reason they hang on 
as leaders despite every kind of public and private failing, is their ability to 
hide inferiority behind blame, to be the parent who sees no wrong in the child. 
But blame is only the most common defense against this embarrassment. Terrorism 
is another. The shame of languishing in the midst of freedom generates a touchy, 
narcissistic sensibility and an abiding faith that, but for the evil of others, 
one's superiority would be self-evident. The terrorist act is a self-referential 
event, a self-congratulation that smothers the feeling of inferiority in one 
glorious blaze of spite. Here, finally, is the effectiveness that is so absent 
elsewhere. Even if you cannot build the World Trade Center's towers--emblems of 
demonstrable Western superiority--you can come along of a Tuesday morning and, 
like God himself, strike them down. 

But there is another actor in this 
drama--white guilt; one of the most powerful yet under estimated forces in 
modern societies. At least 50 whites have told me in the same conversation both 
that they feel no racial guilt and that on some occasion they have not said 
something they truly believed for fear of being marked a racist. But white guilt 
is precisely the latter, not a belief in one's guilt but a vulnerability to 
being stigmatized as a racist because of one's skin color alone. And this is the 
larger terror that hangs over the Western world. White guilt is what causes 
minority and Third World "inferiority" to stand as a negative moral judgment on 
the Western way of life. It presumes that Western success is the result not of 
three millennia of cultural evolution (much of it enhanced by contributions from 
what today we call the Third World) but of the ill-gotten gains of slavery and 
colonialism. Western success is presumed to have come at the price of Third 
World inferiority. This doesn't just mean that Western moral authority is 
hostage to helping the Third World overcome inferiority. More importantly it 
means that Western culture is inherently sinful, that its superiority is a 
measure of its sinfulness. Thus, the World Trade Center towers become monuments 
not of a great civilization but of a great evil. White guilt pushes the West 
into a place where it can redeem its moral authority only by making a virtue of 
moral equivalency. This means that weakness, backwardness, even sinfulness in 
minorities and the Third World are unmentionable. Yasser Arafat visited the 
Clinton White House more than any other world leader.

American civil rights 
organizations almost entirely live off white corporate and foundation money 
despite their total ineffectiveness in solving black problems. Western money has 
gone to blatantly corrupt Third World leaders for decades. White guilt morally 
and culturally disarms the West. It makes the First World apologetic. And this, 
of course, only inflames the narcissism of the ineffectual. In the vacuum of 
power created by guilt, a world-wide class of guilt hustlers has emerged. 
America and the West must cease this three-decade-long indulgence in guilt, 
moral equivalency, and apologia. None of this redeems the West or uplifts the 
Third World. In the place of this there should be only a profound commitment to 
fairness. Here, something like fanaticism is not out of place. After this, 
America and the West should unapologetically pursue their self-interest, let 
others take the lead in their own development, and allow the greatness of 
Western civilization to speak for itself. Mr. Steele, a research fellow at the 
Hoover Institution, is the author of "A Dream Deferred: The Second Betrayal of 
Black Freedom in America" (HaperCollins, 1998). 


Other than Bush at the National Cathedral, this is the best article I've read
1 Posted on 09/17/2001 19:44:24 PDT by calebcar
[ Reply | Private Reply | Top | Last ]



To: calebcar
 
Off to bootcamp with ya!
2 Posted on 09/17/2001 20:14:06 PDT by Carbon
[ Reply | Private Reply | To 1 | Top | Last ]

Disclaimer: Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual posters 
and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its management. 
All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the exemption for 
fair use of copyrighted works. 
[ Top | Latest Posts | Latest Articles | Self Search | Add Bookmark | Post | 
Abuse | Help! ]


      FreeRepublic , LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794
      Forum Version 2.0a Copyright © 1999 Free Republic, LLC 

