Attacks on U.S. Challenge Postmodern True Believers 

      September 22, 2001

      CONNECTIONS 
      Attacks on U.S. Challenge Postmodern True Believers
      By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN
      
Cataclysms not only cast shadows over human victims but also shake the 
      foundations of intellectual life: wars can shift the direction of 
      scholarship; genocide can upend the presumptions of sociology. The 
      destruction of the World Trade Center and the attack on the Pentagon may 
      have similar effects, challenging the intellectual and ethical 
      perspectives of two sets of ideas: postmodernism (affectionately known as 
      pomo) and postcolonialism (which might be called poco). These ideas, which 
      have affected political debate and university scholarship, are now being 
      subject to a shock that may lead in two directions: on one hand to a more 
      intense commitment, and on the other — I hope — to a more intense 
      rejection.

      In general postmodernists challenge assertions that truth and ethical 
      judgment have any objective validity. Postcolonial theorists, who focus on 
      cultures that have experienced Western imperialism, agree in part, 
      suggesting that the seemingly universalist principles of the West are 
      ideological constructs. Many have also implied that one culture, 
      particularly the West, cannot reliably condemn another, that a form of 
      relativism must rule. 

      But such assertions seem peculiar when trying to account for the recent 
      attack. This destruction seems to cry out for a transcendent ethical 
      perspective. And even mild relativism seems troubling in contrast. It 
      focuses on the symmetries between violations. But differences, say, 
      between democracies and absolutist societies or between types of armed 
      conflict are essential now. Debate over these kinds of interpretations are 
      now heating up. So it might be worth examining some hypotheses of poco and 
      pomo. 

      First of all there are some significant differences between the two 
      ideologies. Pomo is partly an attempt to question the fundamental 
      philosophical and political premises of the West. It argues that many of 
      the concepts we take for granted — including truth, morality and 
      objectivity — are culturally "constructed." And some scholars generally 
      agree, including the historian of science Thomas S. Kuhn, who argued that 
      science could not lay claim to universal truths, and the pragmatist 
      philosopher Richard Rorty, who has challenged objective notions of truth. 
      Poco, though, has a more specific ambition, analyzing the effects of 
      colonialism on what used to be called the third world, knottily 
      interpreting how postcolonial societies absorb and contend with the West. 
      But within the poco ideology, Western claims of objectivity are still put 
      into question. In "The Postcolonial Studies Reader" (1995, Routledge), for 
      example, the governing perspective, the editors explain, is opposition to 
      the West's "myth of universality," which is little more than a "strategy 
      of imperial control." One contributor writes: "Postcolonialism is regarded 
      as the need, in nations or groups which have been victims of imperialism, 
      to achieve an identity uncontaminated by universalist or Eurocentric 
      concepts and images."

      In the Sept. 17 issue of The Nation — published just before the attack on 
      the World Trade Center — Edward Said, one of postcolonialism's founding 
      theorists, also points out that unlike radical pomo advocates, he accepts 
      universal principles like "human rights." Still, he refers to "ideological 
      confections": ideas like "the clash of civilizations" that, 
      coincidentally, were invoked by many European and American leaders in 
      condemning the terrorist attack. Such "false universals," Mr. Said says, 
      are used to legitimize "corporate profit-taking and political power." 
      Similar arguments have become commonplace in worldwide protests against 
      "globalization."

      Follow this logic to its most extreme conclusions, and the rejections of 
      universal values and ideals leave little room for unqualified 
      condemnations of a terrorist attack, particularly one against the West. 
      Such an attack, however inexcusable, can be seen as a horrifying airing of 
      a legitimate cultural grievance. Military responses can seem no different. 
      And so the conflict becomes a series of symmetrical confrontations, as is 
      often asserted about battles in Israel. 

      Poco, though, goes further. For while affirming most of the pomo rejection 
      of ideals and universals, poco establishes its own universal: Western 
      imperialism becomes a variety of Original Sin. The implication is that any 
      act against the West by a postcolonial power can be seen as a reaction to 
      an act by the West. 

      These ideas simplify interpretation tremendously. Western imperial 
      behavior is seen as the fundamental cause of terrorism, the evil of the 
      former leading to the evil of the latter, thus creating a rough symmetry 
      in which differences are minimized.

      In last week's issue of The Nation, for example, one writer, after 
      condemning the "indescribable evil" of the attack, says, "This is not 
      really the war of democracy versus terror that the world will be asked to 
      believe." The terrorist attacks, he suggests, were a result of injustices 
      caused by the West. Another writer says that "our own government, through 
      much of the past 50 years, has been the world's leading `rogue state,' " 
      having been responsible for killing "literally hundreds of thousands if 
      not millions, of innocents."

      A column from The Guardian, the British newspaper, calls terror attacks 
      "counterproductive acts of outrage" against Western injustice. Similar 
      sentiments have been expressed about Israel, which is considered a proxy 
      for the United States. A commentator for the BBC said that supposed 
      Israeli violation of international law was a cause, if not the main cause, 
      of terrorism.

      These attitudes are not a traditional expression of left-wing politics. 
      The anti-Western virulence is too strong, and the weakening of judgment 
      against terrorism too prevalent. Symmetries are strained for; one culture 
      (the West) is seen as no more virtuous — indeed far less so — than 
      another, leading to comments that sound eerily similar to some extreme 
      justifications offered in the Arab world. 

      Of course the errors and apparent venality of the West must be considered 
      in examining radical Islamic terrorism. But the intellectual focus on a 
      single and continuing Original Sin creates a skewed perspective.
      As the historian Bernard Lewis has shown, the origins of what he calls 
      Islamic hatred of the West are complicated: a history of struggles going 
      back almost 14 centuries, the fear of modernity felt by "right wing" 
      theocratic fundamentalists, the countries' widespread poverty conjoined 
      with demagogic clerics and wealthy rulers. Terrorist rage is also directed 
      against Arab regimes in which secular life reigns over the religious realm 
      (as in Egypt and Jordan). 

      Christopher Hitchens, while attacking the West in the current issue of The 
      Nation, writes: "Does anyone suppose that an Israeli withdrawal from Gaza 
      would have forestalled the slaughter in Manhattan? It would take a moral 
      cretin to suggest anything of the sort; the cadres of the new jihad make 
      it very apparent that their quarrel is with Judaism and secularism on 
      principle, not with (or not just with) Zionism."

      For now though these considerations are subsumed by poco ideology, spiced 
      by pomo sentiments. While condemning the recent attacks, they establish 
      near symmetries between the outrage of both sides, and they eliminate 
      perspectives that might reveal fundamental cultural differences (like 
      those affirmed, unambiguously, by the attackers). The great ironic twist 
      is that the values latent in pomo and poco — an insistence that differing 
      perspectives be accounted for and that the other be comprehended — are 
      consequences of the very ideas of the Western Enlightenment — reason and 
      universality — that they work to undo.

      One can only hope that finally, as the ramifications sinks in, as it 
      becomes clear how close the attack came to undermining the political, 
      military and financial authority of the United States, the Western 
      relativism of pomo and the obsessive focus of poco will be widely seen as 
      ethically perverse. Rigidly applied, they require a form of guilty 
      passivity in the face of ruthless and unyielding opposition.
